Early in 1914 a strong Company of Volunteers was started in Dunmanway.
Practically all of them were followers of John Redmond and control was
in the hands of Irish Party supporters. The small Republican group in
Dunmanway took no part in this movement. They continued to drill and be
active up to about April, 1915. After that they dissolved. About the
time that they faded out a small group, which included Tadg O'Shea, Liam
Duggan, Michael McCarthy and. myself, started to organise a Company of
Irish Volunteers. We had only about twelve men in the town at the start,
but gradually worked up to seventeen. 1915 C.A. In May, 1916 Tom Donovan
organised a Section of the Company in Behagh district, and. in August,
1915, we got a Section going in Ballinacarriga. These three groups
comprised the Dunmanway Company. There was a sum of money in the bank
here which had been held by the survivors of an old I.R.B group in the
district. The trustees were Patrick McCarthy, Main Street, James
McCarthy, Main Street and Daniel McCarthy (the Cooper). These men, led
by Dan McCarthy, had maintained the Fenian tradition, encouraged and
supported every non-party national movement and when Sinn Fein was
started had established a Branch in Dunmanway, but they would not agree
to use the fund they controlled for any political purpose. They held
that it had been collected for the purchase of arms, and to that purpose
only, when they were satisfied that men determined to achieve freedom by
force of arms had. been organised, would they agree to devote the money.
They would not agree to have it used for the purchase of arms for the
National Volunteers because they did not believe these men had any
serious intention of fighting. When the Company of Irish Volunteers was
started they agreed that the purpose for which the fund was intended was
being realised in them, and that it was their duty to make the money
available. A further difficulty arose in that one of them, James
McCarthy, Wou1d not agree to the withdrawal of the money until be got a
guarantee that he would get a weapon himself out of it. Eventually this
was agreed to a part of the money was Withdrawn, and with it Peadar
O'Hourihan purchased for us in Dublin two Nauser rifles and three
pistols. Jim McCarthy got one Of the pistols, and the Company never saw
it afterwards. There was then a balance of, I think, about E3O left in
the fund. The Behagh Section made a collection for arms, and out of it
put a similar amount into a fund. Both amounts were sent to Dublin for
the purchase of arms a short time before the Rising, but the Company
never got any arms for this money. The men paid 2d or 3d a week into a
Company fund for the purchase of equipment, and that fund was
supplemented by collections. Out of it we purchased haversacks, belts,
caps and puttees. Regular weekly parades were held, the Dunmanway
Section usually meeting the Behagh Section and training with them. We
were drilled by Seán Mackey and. Tadg O'Shea. On Sundays Dunmanway
Section Would join Behagh and both march to join the Ballinacarriga
Section Parades were held -2- every Sunday, and some of them were to
neighbouring districts where meetings were held to recruit for the
Volunteers. The first public parade of the Company outside its own area
was to the Manchester Martyrs' procession in Cork in November, 1915.
About 60 men from the Company took part. We had no arms at that time. On
St. Patrick's Day, 1916, about the same number again took part in the
demonstration in Cork, On this occasion we had a few rifles, and the
remainder of the men had shot guns. We had no pikes in the Company.
Shortly after the formation of the Company the following Officers were
elected, and there was no change up to Easter Week, l916:- Captain: Con
Ahern. 2nd i/c: Michael McCarthy. There were no other Officers, but Tom
Donovan was in charge of Behagh Section and Paddy O'Brien of
Ballinacarriga Section. Michael McCarthy and I attended the Course for
Officers conducted by Captain J.J. O'Connell at the Hall in Sheares
Street, Cork, in January, l916. Training was continued actively from our
return off the Course up to Easter, 1916. The Company strength remained
about 60 men. The arms position was somewhat better as we had got a few
rifles and could call on a number of shot guns from local farmers at any
time. About a week before Easter 1916, Terence McSwiney attended a
meeting at the Hall in Dunmanway, C.A. TheCoy Speer and Section
Conwarder WereFrerant and also Tadg 0'Shea and Liam Duggan. At that
meeting McSwiney gave us instructions for the parade on Easter Sunday.
They were to the effect that we were to parade at Dunmanway with all
arms, ammunition and equipment and rations for three days. We were to
march from there to Inchigeela and arrive there at some stated time,
which, as far as I remember, was 3 o'clock. He gave us no indication of
what the purpose of the parade was, or of. where we were to go from
Inchigeela. He said nothing about a Rising or about a landing of arms. I
met McSwiney again on (I believe) Good Friday at Fanlobus, one and. a
half miles east of Dunmanway. The appointment for me to meet him there
had been made by Tadg O'Shea when he met MacSwiney in Clonakilty some
days previously, McSwiney had a motor cycle on this occasion and did not
want to come into the town. He asked me "Is everything in readiness "
and I said. "Yes". Having gone over our arrangements in detail, he said
to me before 1eaving, "I want you to leave the town on Sunday without
causing any suspicion, and as quietly as possible". I did not get any
further information from him as to the purpose of the parade, except
that we would get orders at Inchigeela. The Company mobilised in
Dunmanway after 8 o'clock Mass on Easter Sunday morning. the following
paraded -3- Con Ahern. Michael McCarthy. Liam Duggan. Tadg O\'Shea.
Timothy O\'Brien. Richard O\'Neill, Con Sullivan. Tim Coakley. Eamom
Young Con Hurley. Dan Keeffe. Con Keane. Michael Connolly. Con Donovan.
Shinagh. James Delaney. Michael Dooley. Thomas O\'Donovan. Denis
O\'Donovan. Michael Murphy. Pat Corcoran. Tim Corcoran. John Hennessy.
Dan Kelleher. Paddy Coakley. Jim Donovan. James Coakley. Jeremiah Deasy.
John Joe Coakley. Jeremiah Crowley. Patrick O\'Brien. James McCarthy.
Michael Sullivan. James Driscoll. Thomas O\'Keeffe. Patrick McCarthy.
Michael Crowley. Patrick Coakley. John Hurley. James Delaney and Michael
Dooley did not go to Inchigeela. We had no arms for them. They. were
bakers who had to go to work at 3 o\'clock that day and Would lose their
employtment if absent. I excused them. from the parade. and sent them
home before we left Dunmanway. The arms which we had on Easter Sunday
were:- Two German Mauser Rifles with 20 rounds. One Martini Henry Rifle
with 50 rounds .303. Two Service Rifles with 40 rounds .303. Two .32
Pistols with 50 rounds. One .32 Revolver with 20 rounds. C.A
Twenty-eight shot Guns with about 300 rounds. There were only two men
who had not either a rifle or a shot gun. Michael McCarthy and I had a
rifle and a pistol each, and Dunmanway Section (16) Bahagh Section. (13)
Ballinacarriga Section. (9) -4--- we gave the rifles to two of the men.
We had no pikes or explosives. The Lyre Company under Jim Walsh joined
us at Dunmanway before we started the 13 mile march to Inchigeela. It
was agreed between Jim Walsh and myself that I would take charge of both
Companies on the march. Advance and rear guards were detailed. Some
distance South of Inchigeela Peadar O'Hourihan on a motor cycle met us.
He had come from. the Inchigeela direction. He did not bring any message
and the only information he looked for from me was the number of men on
parade. Having got this, he preceded us into Inchigeela. We were a
little ahead of time and a short halt was called at the Rook, South of
the village. We marched in at 3 o'clock, scouts and. advance guards
leading. Tomás MacCurtain and Terence MacSwiney arrived in a motor car
at the same time. Tomás congratulated me on our punctuality. He told me
that the exercises had been cancelled and that we were to return to our
own areas. He did not give me any further information, We marched back
to Dunmanway in a downpour of rain. R.I.C. men from Dunmanway had gone
with us and they came back with us. Two policemen from Inchigeela had
come out to meet us. Many of the men from Lyre Company stayed in
Dunmanway that night, and some of them for some days afterwards, On
Easter Monday no orders or communications of any kind came to the
Company, but late that night we beard vague rumours that something was
on in Dublin. On Tuesday the news of the Rising was more definite and
the police started barricading their barracks in the town. That night we
decided We would send Michael McCarthy to Tom Hales next morning to see
if he had any definite news or instructions for us. Michael McCarthy
went by an early train to Bandon on Wednesday morning. He returned the
same night. His report was that Tom Hales had told him the Cork men were
completely surrounded and could not move. Tom Hales proposed that if
Dunmanway and the Companies in the Macroom area Would join forces with
him we would move in from the North and relieve the Cork City men. Liam
Duggan, Tadg O'Shea and myself were waiting for Michael McCarthy when he
came back on Wednesday night. The four of us discussed the matter and
decided to send Tadg O'Shea North in an affort to get the Macroom men to
agree to Tom Hales' proposal. I have no recollection of Paddy O'Brien
being in. Tadg O'Shea left late that night, but it was to Ballingeary he
went. He was to be back at mid-day on Thursday but he did not arrive,
until late on Thursday night. He had been avoiding the main roads. The
reply he brought was that the men North were not wining to move without
orders from the Brigade Officers. Michael McCarthy went East to Tom
Hales with the reply on Friday. He went by train to Bandon. They decided
there it was then too late to take any action. We had. no contact. with
the Bantry Company except that we had established a despatch route to
them. -5- We had kept the Company on the alert and ready for action
during the week. There was nothing we could do now except to safeguard.
the arms. This was done, but afterwards one Mauser rifle and one old pin
fire revolver were surrendered. These were the only arms surrendered or
captured in the Company area. Raiding started in the following week and
many members of the Company went on the run. I was arrested and so was
Dan McCarthy (Michael\'s father), although he was too old to be in the
Volunteers. also Tadg O\'Shea Liam Duggan and cow O\'Sullivan Apart from
the survivors of the old I,R.B. group previously referred to, there was
no I.R.B. organisation in the district before 1916. There was no Fianna
organisation in the area before the Rising.
