The Dungourney Company of the Irish Volunteers was formed at a meeting
held in Dungourney in October, 1915. The districts included in the
Company Area were Dungourney, Clonmult and Ballynoe. The district was
strongly O'Brienite at the time, and there had never been any National
Volunteer organisation in it, although they had a strong Company at
Mogeely. There was a good national spirit in the district. Gaelic League
classes were in progress for many years. SeánÓ Tuama of,Cork taught
Irish classes here. There was a veryoliveG.A.A. Club also. The immediate
circumstances which gave rise to the formation of the Company were that
Torn and David Kent of Castlelyons came to Dungourney on a Sunday in
October, 1915. They were both in Volunteer uniform. They had been in
Clonmult but had tailed to make contact there. I met them before Miss
and told them that a British recruiting meeting Was to be held after
Mass that day. Action was quickly decided upon1 I got five or six of the
local lads to go through the congregation and ask the men to assemble at
the Tallow side of the village after Mass. About 100 men, young and old,
assembled. We put them in fours and told them what we proposed to do.
They were instructed that they were to hold their formation whatever
happened and, not break ranks. I went down to the village to see if the
recruiting meeting was on - It 7as. Captain Donnellan, Major Hallinan
and a few other speakers from Cork wore present. There were no military
or police. I went back and we then marched our body of men right through
the meeting. When Captain Donnellan saw us coming, he said, \"Here are
our boys\"; he thought we were Nationa1 Volunteers. We marched on to the
end of the village, then turned about and marched back. When we got back
in a few minutes the meeting had broken up and the people scattered.
Captain Donnellan went to the Parish Priest. We then adjourned to an old
library building ón the Mount Uniake road, where we held a meeting and
decided to form a Company of Volunteers. I was Chairman of the meeting
and tom and David Kent were present. A. Committee of twelve was
appointed, of which I was elected Chairman. About 100 men nominally
joined the Company and about 60 of these became active members. Next day
the D.I, of the R.G.C. came to me and enquired if I had any knowledge of
what happened in the village on the previous day. I said that it was his
business to find out. Extensive enquiries were made in the village and
neighbourhood, but the police were unable to get any names and no action
was taken. At the recruiting meeting Captain Donnellan had been quoting
the numbers of men Who had joined the British forces from various
districts around. An old man in the audience, named Barry, remarked,
\"The more the fools they are\". The police enáeavoured -2- to trace Who
had made this remark, but without success. The Company immediately got
down to serious work and training. The Committee met weekly and a parade
was held every week. My brother, Maurice Ahern, was appointed Company
Captain and I acted as Secretary. There were no other Officers, and.
there were no changes down to Easter, 1916. The Company took part in
efforts to organise and recruit for the Volunteers in neighbouring
districts. We paraded at a meeting in Lisgoold where Tom Kent, Terence
MacSwiney and Seán Nolan spoke. We had a Sunday parade to Inch also for
the same purpose. The Company Captain, Maurice Ahern, and Martin
O\'Keeffe of Ballynoe attended the Course for Officers conducted
byCaptain J.J. O\'Connell at the Volunteer Hall in Sheares\' Street in
January, About 60 men from the Company took part in the St. Patrick\'s
Day parade in Cork on 1916. Only some of them were armed at that time.
The men paid a weekly subscription, and out of this fund we purchased
haversacks, belts and bandoliers. Most of the were equipped in this way
at Easter, 1916. On Wednesday of Holy Week Fred Murray of Cork came to
Castlequarter with the orders for Easter Sunday, 1916. He brought the
orders orally, but also left a note of them signed by himself. I met
him. The orders were that the Company was to go to Cork to the Volunteer
Hall on Easter Sunday evening with all arms and equipment. We were to go
prepared for action. Nothing was said about rations, as far as I
remember, nor of how long we would be away, nor of the purpose of the
mobilisation. We had no idea of what was intended. The whole Company Was
notified. I went to Cork on Saturday morning. I Went to the Volunteer
Hall in Sheares\' Street. There I saw, first, Tadg Barry and afterwards
Tomás MacCurtain and Terence MacSwiney. Cartridges werebeing loaded with
buckshot in the Hall. I wanted to arrange for billets for Dungourney
Company and I spoke to Tomás and Terry about this. They enquired how
many men were coming. I was not sure and said perhaps up to 30. They
said they Would get in straw and the Company could billet In the Hall.
Before leaving home I had arranged to send a telegram to my brother,
Maurice Ahern, the Company Captain. I sent it off from Cork between 11
and 12 o\'clock. \"Send on the cattle\" and signed it \"John McCarthy\".
I then returned by train to Mogeely Station and-met the Company there.
There was no R.I.C. barrack at Dungourney. It was in the Mogeely
district and SergeantGi1roy was then the Sergeant in charge there. He
and Constable Lee were at the station. Lee was a bit aggressive and
wanted to know where the Volunteers were going. The Sergeant pulled Lee
away. Gilroy was always friendly. He told me, after our Dungourney, that
police from his station should have teen present at the recruiting
meeting but that he had not got instructions in time, and his
authorities had not been able to prove that he failed in his duty after
receiving instructions. -3- The Company travelled to Cork by train from
Mogeely Station, arriving in Cork about 8.30 p.m. They wore met at Cork
by two City Volunteers who took them via Oliver Plunket Street (then Old
George\'s Street) to the Volunteer Hall. The Ballynoe and Clomnult men
had cycled in and left their bicycles in Dungourney. The following
paraded:- (27) Captain: Maurice Ahern, Castlequarter. Michael (Mac)
Sullivan, Dungourney. Padraig Mulcahy, Timothy Mulcahy, Jack Flanagan,
John Stanton, Tim McCarthy, Mick McCarthy, John Murphy, Tim Lynch) Pa
Moore, Jim Colbert, Tol Hurley, Mick Hennessy, Clonmult. Mick Carey,
John Lawton, John O\'Mahony, Tim Mulcahy (Yank), Pat Geaney, Tom
Cronin, - Willie Foley (Cuddy), Pat Knowles, Martin O\'Keeffe, Ballynoe.
David O\'Sullivan, Peter O\'Callaghan, Timothy Hurley, Seán Hennessy,
The arms in the Company at Easter, 1916, were:- One rifle .297250 with a
small quantity of ammunition. Forty shot guns, with about 20 rounds
each. Two revolvers, with a small quantity of ammunition. Twenty pikes,
made locally. We had no explosives. The shot guns were owned by the men
themselves, or were on loan from local farmers. The arms actually taken
to Cork on Easter Saturday wore the rifle, the two revolvers, and about
26 shot guns. The Company went to Mass at St. Francis, Liberty Street,
on Sunday morning and afterwards paraded with the Cork City Companies,
took the train to Crookstown and marched to Macroom. They were not then
in possession of any further information as to the intentions of the
Brigade Officers, or the purpose of the parade. It was only when they
saw so many of the Cork Volunteers going to Holy Communion on Sunday
morning that they began to suspect something unusual was on. -4- When
the parade was dismissed in Crookstown the Company returned to Cork by
train, and travelled back to Mogee1y by train also the same evening.
Some of the Dungourney lads had gone into Mullaney\'s public house,
opposite Glanmire Railway Station, While waiting for their train. They
were caught there by the police, and, in the subsequent prosecutions,
the police said they were not travellers because they (the police) were
aware that the men had slept in Cork the previous night. No order came
to the Company during Easter Week. At the end of that week, or the,
beginning of the next week, Sergeant Gilroy sent Maurice Donovan
Ladysbridge is to warn my brother Maurice that he would bearrested on a
particular night. Maurice left home but the raid did not take place that
night. Next day Sergeant Gilroy came himself and told me the order had
been cancelled but They Were searched the Cob In White my 4 Ontsold son
Liam was sleeping that a raid would be made later and ho may not know
the date. A few days later police, under an Inspector and Head
Constable, raided for Maurice, They threatened to arrest me if he was
not available, but they did not do so. About two weeks later Maurice
came back and was later arrested at home. He was taken to Cork and
subsequently to Wakefield. There were no other arrests in the Company
Area. Men were interrogated in connection with arms, and efforts were
made by the police to get arms surrendered to them, though no actual
searches for arms were made. James Kelleher was approached by the police
in this way and told. that the only way be could save himself from
arrest and internment was to hand in the arms. He collected twelve or
more shot guns and handed them in at Ballynoe R.I.C. Barracks. These
were the only arms surrendered in the Company area. There as no Fiannaor
I.R.B. organisations in the area before 1916.
