In the district which was later known as the 3rd Battalion area, and
which subsequently enclosed a roughly rectangular area stretching from
just East of Carrigrohane, Westwards along the River Lee to South of
Coachford, then South across the railway line just West of Crookstown
Road Station and East along the Brigade boundary to some miles North of
Kinsale Junction, then North East, leaving Waterfall to the West and so
around to Carrigrohane, a few men in Srelane formed the first Volunteer
Company early in November, 1916. This Company was originally organised
by the Herlihy brothers, Tim and Jeremiah, by Mick O\'Regan, D. Flavin
and a couple more; in fact, the strength of the Company when first
formed was six. These six Volunteers got in touch with Volunteer
Headquarters in Cork, the first contact being made with Florrie
O\'Donoghue, Brigade Adjutant, and were duly recognised as the Srelane
Company. Cork Vo1unteer. Headquarters sent out an organiser and military
trainer - -2- Leo Murphy of Fianna Erieann. The training consisted
mostly of drill at first for the purpose of discipline and as the
Company gradually increased in strength by twos and threes from the
original six it was able to be organised on a proper basis. Then Peter
O\'Donovan was sent by Brigade Headquarters to instruct in tactics, and
Florrie O\'Donoghue used to carry out inspections and give talks on the
objects for which the Volunteers were formed. Leo Murphy continued as
instructor to the Company. The first public parade of the Srelane
Company was held one Sunday in January, 1917, greatly to the
astonishment of all the people outside Knockanemore Chapel, the parish
church for Ovens and Srelane. Subscriptions by members of the Company
had been spent in purchasing slouch hats for all and the Officers had
Sam Brown belts. All carried hurleys. The Company went on a route march
after Mass from Ovens round by Kilcrea Abbey and Brelane. There was
another route march on the following Sunday and drilling was carried out
at Farnivane in the presence of two B.I.C. men who followed the Company
on its march but did not otherwise interfere. Up to March, 1917, Srelane
Company had increased tremendously in numbers and was eventually divided
into two Sections, Srelane and Killumney. Killumney then became an
independent Company. Now the Volunteers, a good number of them, had arms
and ammunition, though the arms consisted principally of shotguns. Being
a farming district, every farmhouse had a shotgun and even though -3-
these may have belonged to the head of the house, it was the Volunteer
son or sons got possession of the family shotgun and eventually they
were all collected together and put into the Company dump. During the
threat of conscription in April, 1918, lQO5 of the men in the area
joined the Volunteers and all prepared to resist conscription
determinedly. Now the British authorities prohibited meetings and games.
However, a camogie match and aeridheact (which were organised to get
money for the arms fund) were advertised to be held at Garryheston one
Sunday in May, 1918. The function was prohibited by the British and so
the word was passed around and everyone went to Coakley\'s field at
Begley\'s Forge and the camogie match was started. Tim Herlihy was the
referee. Soon some R.I.C. men were on the scene and regarding him as the
man responsible, as indeed he was, for he was O.C. Srelane Company, they
tried to intercept him as he ran up and down the field, apparently
intent on the game but really evading them. They dashed here and there
after him but the players got in their way and they were being made a
laugh of by the onlookers. Then the military came and with fixed
bayonets dispersed the crowd. The Volunteer Band from Cork was in
attendance and two of its members, Wickham and McCorry, were arrested
and got a month in jail for unlawful assembly. It is interesting to
mention that in this same year, 1918, the Volunteers of the two
Companies planted a tree for each one of the 1916 leaders who had been
executed. -4- The trees were planted near the main Cork-Macroom road
between Srelane and Farran on Gerald Desmond\'s land, the first
farmhouse along the road after Srelane. A grove of trees grew up here
during the later years. The chief activities of a military nature during
1918 were parades for drill and tactics, but when 1919 came raiding for
arms started. The R.I.C. had orders from the British Government to
collect all privately owned arms but in our area they were forestalled,
the Volunteers doing the collecting before them. Houses of loyalists
which were raided were Clarke\'s of Farran, Hornibrook\'s of Killumney,
McGivern\'s of Waterfall and also Castle White at the same place. A good
supply of arms was collected. When the Volunteers came to Hornibrook\'s
house, however, he spoke out of a window to them and said he would
resist. In the course of his declarations, he quoted Mr. Gladstone as
having once said that every man\'s house was his castle and so he was
going to defend his. And so he did and defended it well. He was a good
shot but after half an hour\'s fight the Volunteers forced their way in
and compelled his surrender. No one was hurt on either side but three
revolvers with about 300 rounds of ammunition for them and two shotguns
were secured. From 1916 to 1919 in the area which was to be known later
as the 3rd Battalion, 1st Cork Brigade, things were generally quiet, but
now arid again the military and R.I.C. enforced their rule, which acted
as a stimulus on the civilian population. There was a spirit growing in
the area and organisers came along from outside, principally -5- from
Cork City, so things went on until 1919 when the 3rd Battalion was
formed with Leo Murphy as Commandant. The Battalion was made up of
Companies from \'A\' to \'F\' and, while operating as such, consisted of
from 300 to 350 Volunteers. At its formation, the Battalion was badly
equipped with arms, etc., but raids carried out by each Company in their
own area did much to help, but the captures were, on the whole, only
shotguns and an odd revolver. In the meantime, the Battalion was going
through a course of training, the usual drill that went to the making of
a Volunteer and fitting each man for sterner work later. It might be no
harm to mention that in the area there was one Military Barracks
(Ballincollig village) garrisoned by the Manchester Regiment, commanded
by an Officer named Dowling (\'C\' Company Area), one R.I.C. Barracks
one mile to the West (\'B\' Company Area), which was Headquarters, with
a complement of about 30 men, and a sprinkling of Black and Tans, under
a D.I. To the West of this, about 8 miles, was another R.I.C. Barracks
in Farran (\'E\' Company Area), held by 8 or 9 men, to the East of
Ballincollig Barracks, about 5 miles from Cork City. All those led in a
direct route from Cork to Macroom on the old coach road. Scattered
through the area were the loyalists and supporters who had to be dealt
with, sometimes burned out or deported. Those actions often led to raids
by the military and R.I.C., especially in and around Waterfall and
Ballinora (\'C\' Company). -6- The usual Battalion Council meetings were
held regularly, but the venue was changed to meet occasions. In May,
1919, the 3rd Battalion Was organised. Florrie O\'Donoghue, Cork I
Brigade Adjutant, supervised an election of Officers at Srelane in that
month. Tim Herlihy Was elected Battalion Commanding Officer. The 3rd
Battalion now comprised three Companies - Srelane, Killumney and
Ballinora. Tim Herlihy then organised Aherla, Farran and Farnanes and
this number of Companies made up the 3rd Battalion during the remainder
of the period up to the Truce In July, 1921. From the 1st April, 1919,
to the 31st March, 1920, Tim Herlihy perfected the Battalion
organisation. The following was the Battalion Staff and Officers and
N.C.Os. of the six Companies at this time, the first-mentioned names in
the list represent the holders of the appointments during the period
above-mentioned, the others being successors at later dates : Battalion
Headquarters\' Staff: (with succeeding Officers). O.C. Tim Herliby. Leo
Murphy. Michael O\'Regan. V/O.C. Jerry O\'Shea. James Foley. M.ORegan.
M. Foley. Adjutant, Willie Cotter. Daniel Keane. Q.M. Tom Hickey. N.
O\'Regan. T. O\'Keeffe. B. Colley. Signals. John Sullivan. Jeremiah
Hurley. Engineers. Michael O\'Connell. I.0. Tim O\'Keeffe. James Ahern.
Liaison and Communications Officer between I and III Brigades. Dick
Cotter. -7- \'A\' Coninanv. Srelane. Strength: 72 0.C. Tim Healy. J.
O\'Brien. 1st Lieut. D. Flavin. 2nd Lieut. J. O\'Brien. T. Hallissey.
Adjutant. Jack Herlihy. Q.M. Jerh. Herlihy. Signals. Jerh. Hallissey.
Engineers. Paddy Galvin. I.C. Denis O\'Sullivan. Section Leaders: Tim
Hallissey. Matty O\'Leary. \'B\' Company. Killumney. Strength: 68 0.C.
Sonny O\'connell. Thomas Keobane. 1st Lieut. Jack Delaney. Larry
Scannell. Tom Donovan. 2nd Lieut. Larry Scannell. - Coakley. Connie 0
\'Sullivan. Adjutant. Patrick Coakley. Q.M. Tim Coakley. Signals. Danny
Scannell. Engineers. Patrick Collins. I.0. John O\'Connell. Georgie
O\'Brien. Section Leaders: Tim O\'Brien. Jack Cotter. Jimmie Callaghan.
Jack Sullivan. -8- \'C\' ComDanv. Ballinora. Strength: O.C. 1st Lieut.
2nd Lieut. Adjutant. Q.M. Signals. Engineers. 1.0. Section Leaders: J.
Murray. P. Donovan. Dick Lucy. F. O\'Sullivan. H. Murphy. Daniel Forde.
C. O\'Shea. J. Murphy. J. Horgan. D. Donovan. D. Mahony. P. Donovan. J.
Lynch. T. Riordan. J. Ahern. D. Forde. J. Ryan. \'D\' Company. Strength:
O.C. 1st Lieut. 2nd Lieut. Adjutant. Q.M. Signals. Engineers. I.0.
Section Leaders: Aherla. 46 James Foley. Patrick Cronin. T. Foley. P.
Walsh. John Burns. J. Lynch. T. Mahony. Denis 0 \'Callaghan. John Lynch.
Jack Dineen. J. Ahern. Jim Cough\].an. Patrick Cronin. -9- \'E\'
Company. Farran. Strength: 50 O.C. Se√°n Hayes (later 0.C. Bn. Column.)
Dan Desmond. 1st Lieut. Dan Desmond. 2nd Lieut. Patrick Murphy.
Adjutant. Patrick O\'Leary. Q.M. Denis Desmond. Signals. Michael Murphy.
John Flynn. Engineers. Richard O\'Regan. John Murphy. I.0. Michael
Ahern. Section Leaders: John Murphy. Patrick O\'Leary. Patrick Rice.
Michael O\'Callaghan. \'F\' Company. Farnanes. Strength: 70 0.C.
Jeremiah Carroll. 1st Lieut. John Lane. 2nd Lieut. Michael O\'Connor.
Adjutant. Denis Hennessy. Q.M. Cornelius Lynch. Signals. Daniel
O\'Connor. Engineers. John O\'Connor. I.O. Daniel O\'Mahony. Section
Leaders: Daniel Lyons. Jeremiah Healy. Laurence O1Leary. Richard Walshe.
-10- The 3rd Battalion found an ideal Headquarters at Cullinanes (Old
House) near Aherla. It was at this house that prisoners from both the
1st and 3rd Brigades were detained. Transgressors against the common law
as administered by the Irish or Sinn F√©in Courts and also spies and
informers were brought here. Here also many spies were courtmartialled
and shot later in the war. In November, 1919, when Torn Hales was 0.C.
Cork III Brigade he sent some prisoners to 3rd Battalion Headquarters
for trial. These were the first offenders tried by an Irish Republican
Court, probably, in Cork County. Sean Buckley of Bandon was Chairman of
the Court between April, 1920, And the end of March, 1921. Other Court
members were Willie Walsh of Bandon, Michael Coholan, nephew of the
Bishop of Cork, and John Scannell. All cases were equitably dealt with
and the Court administered justice impartially, as the members well
understood local conditions. The British Courts ceased to function as
all local cases were brought. before the Sinn F√©in Court. Protection
during the Court sittings and police duties were provided by \'D\'
Company, in whose area the Courthouse was situated. This Company also
guarded prisoners, whether criminal or political. Thompson and the
Herons, senior and junior, must have been the first prisoners to have
been expelled from Ireland by a Republican Court. They were strongly
suspected of being spies for the British but there was not sufficient
evidence to convict them, so, instead, they were expelled from the
country. They had been passed on from the III -11- Brigade for safe
keeping while awaiting trial. Another prisoner, MacGibbon, against whom
suspicion was not so strong, was given the benefit of the doubt and was
released. O\'Brjen and Beasley were the first men tried by the Court at
Cullinanes on a criminal charge, that of robbery. They had taken a large
sum of money, but it was recovered and so they were released. In May,
1920, the Battalion was responsible for a diversionary attack on Farran
R.I.C. Barracks. This Was simply for the purpose of holding down the
garrison here and to try and draw the military from Ballincollig
Barracks towards the South West and thus away from Blarney (on the
opposite side of the Brigade area) where a big attack was being carried
out the same night. In the first week in June, 1920, Brigade H.Q.
ordered Tim Herlihy to mobilise the 3rd Battalion to co-operate with the
2nd Battalion to capture Farran Police Barracks - the last British
stronghold from Ballincollig to Macroom. Blocking the roads at strategic
positions near Ballincollig, the O.C. 3rd Battalion placed an armed
outpost of 12 men, 6 rifles, 3 revolvers and 3 shotguns. Two of the
shotguns were converted rifles - a terrific weapon with buckshot. The
7th (Macroom) Battalion was guarding roads leading from Macroom. A
one-storied house, owned by Mrs. Murphy, joined the double-storied
Barracks. Evacuating the Murphy family, Aherla Company, O.C. Jimmy Foley
(deceased), carried an explosive charge of guncotton and sandbags into
position -12- by the Barrack wall in Murphy\'s room. A picked storming
party of 2nd and 3rd Battalion men was ready. The explosion was terrific
but unlucky - a heavy range in the Barrack side retarded the shock,
which blew the roof completely off Murphy\'s room. A beam of the roof
was actually blown through the roof of a house at the other side of the
road, 25 yards away; but the breach made in the wall of the Barracks was
only a crevice above the range. We did fire through that slit and our
chaps outside blasted the windows and door. The R.I.C. immediately sent
up Verey lights. Called on to surrender, they refused. Eventually, we
had to break off the fight for fear of reinforcements, but we withdrew
in good military order. Next day, 6th June, 1920, the police evacuated
Farran Barracks and went to Ballincollig R.I.C. Barracks. Following the
evacuation of Farran Barracks by the police, it was partly destroyed by
explosives and then finally was burnt out on the 12th June. There was
the usual military activity after this event, as a reprisal, a clubroom
in Srelane, in \'A\' Company area, being burnt. The Cork and Bandon
railway passes through Waterfall (\'C\' Company) and from mid 1920 to
the end of that year raids were carried out on the trains and mails
taken. As a result of one of these raids, two British Intelligence
Officers were discovered and were summarily dealt with. Now and again
shots were fired just to draw the R.I.C. to investigate. So, after one
of these raids, Head Constable Larkin and Sergeant Bloxham cycled to
Waterfall but were -13- caught in an ambush quickly prepared and Bloxham
was shot dead, his arms and bike being taken, while Larkin got away
uninjured. After the shooting of Bloxham the R.I.C. got out of hand and
after his funeral swooped on the village of Ballincollig with red paint
and marked about half a dozen houses for burning. Strange to relate,
although there were seven Volunteers 1iing in the village not one of
their houses was marked. The houses down for destruction belonged to
pro-Britishers. However, the houses were not burned. In the Autumn of
this year, after Terence MacSwiney, Lord Mayor of Cork and our
Brigadier, had died on hunger strike in Brixt6n Prison in London, the
3rd Battalion in force attended his funeral in Cork. It was reckoned
that the Battalion paraded 508 men strong. At this time after nightfall
shots were fired occasionally occasionally about 200 yards from the
Military Barracks at Ballincollig just to keep the military guessing; so
the usual patrols followed, but there was an Intelligence System in
operation in the Barracks, carried out by the local Volunteers, which
nipped them in the bud, by sending out word prior to their moving out of
Barracks. There was a Captain Thompson, I.0. Manchester Regiment, who
used to go into shops and houses in Ballincollig village, brandishing a
revolver and saying that if anything happened to him the village would
go up but he was caught at Carrigrohane on his motor bike and shot dead,
his arms and bike being taken. No reprisals took place but there was
tension for a while. This was in November, 1920. Captain Thompson was
shot dead by Leo Murphy and two other Volunteers on the Model -14- Farm
Road. Thompson had previously raided Leo Murphy\'s mother\'s house. He
was drunk at the time and boasted that he was out to get all I.R.A.
leaders as he had got the leaders in Egypt. He treated Rose Murphy very
roughly and this helped to cause her early death. When captured he tried
to save himself by informing his captors that a cease fire was coming
and that Ireland was getting Dominion Home Rule. He said he had this
from Dublin Castle. This special pleading didn\'t work, however, and he
was shot out of hand. Captain Thompson was suceeded as I.0. by Captain
Vining. It was he who shot Leo Murphy on 27th June, just a fortnight
before the Truce. Leo Murphy was then 0.C. 3rd Battalion, having
succeeded Tim Herlihy, who was taken prisoner by the British. Apparently
Vining was acting on information supplied him about Leo Murphy\'s
movements for he and about five other British Officers drove up in a car
to Donovan\'s public house at Waterfall one evening and surrounded the
house. There were about forty-four in all in the pub, the great majority
of whom were elderly men who had been attending a bowling match in the
locality. Of all the crowd there were only a fey Volunteers. Two of them
escaped, but Leo Murphy, who tried to shoot his way out, was shot dead.
Another Volunteer, Charlie Daly, who was unarmed, was taken away by
Captain Vining and his party and his dead body was found at Douglas the
next morning. He had been shot. Daly belonged to the 2nd Battalion (Cork
City). -15- On 4th October, 1920, the Battalion endeavoured to carry out
an ambush of British military travelling by lorry along the Bandon road
Just South of the Chetwynd Viaduct on the Cork, Bandon and South Coast
Railway. The Volunteers were in position but were surrounded by military
from Cork, it was assumed from information given, and with difficulty
got away with all their arms and ammunition, all but one man, Jeremiah
O\'Herlihy, who was wounded after being taken prisoner and died later in
hospital in Cork. Over six feet, with a magnificent physique, a sincere
Volunteer, Jeremiah O\'Herlihy, 0.C. Signals, 3rd Battalion, died for
Ireland October l1fth, 1920. Jeremiah O\'Herlihy held a position
commanding a clear two mile view of the road each way from our ambush
position. His duty was to signal the enemy approach. We believe his
sense of duty made him hold his position too long. Captured by the
enemy, they pretended to release him, then, when he had walked off some
distance, they fired on him. Shot in the throat, he rolled down about 50
yards of the steep field to the fence. There they left him for dead. A
brave local woman found him late that evening, contacting Cork Fire
Station Ambulance which conveyed him to the Union Hospital, Douglas
Road. We had him removed to the Mosphere Private Hospital, Dyke Parade,
owned by two very gallant lady nurses, Mrs. Blonden and Miss MacGee. He
died nine days afterwards. The Battalion gave him a military funeral to
his native Carrigadrohid. Among the British forces who attempted to
surround the 3rd Battalion at the Viaduct, October 5th, 1920, was -16- a
squad of Auxiliaries. Capturing a number of civilians on the Cork-Bandon
road they carried them to Lynch\'s outhouse, situated half a mile from
Waterfall, 21/2 miles from the Viaduct. This outhouse was divided into
two compartments, one for cattle, the other containing old damp hay. The
\"Auxies\" thrust their prisoners into the cattle compartment,
padlocking the door. They then set fire to the old hay and stood some
distance away to enjoy the sport. The hay was slow to fire but dense
smoke rose up in the sky. Apparently seeing the smoke, a military
officer rushed his men for the house and, after a bitter show-down with
the \"Atxies\", the Officer, to his credit, released the smothering
prisoners. Leo Murphy and Willie Cotter were going through Washington
Street in Cork one evening and went into a publichouse. They were
followed in by Sergeant Dodds of the R.I.C. who was working for British
Intelligence. He attempted to get into conversation with them but they
paid no attention and after a while left and went off towards the
Mardyke Parade. Eventually he tried to corner them but they rushed him,
knocked him over and his head came with such force against the pavement
that he was killed outright. Murphy and Cotter took two guns they found
on his person and departed. There was an order from Brigade not to
attack enemy lorries coming in from the country towards Cork for fear of
there being prisoners in them as in the event of this happening the
prisoners were bound to suffer one way or the -17- other. Generally
there were prisoners being carried, so the decision was a wise one.
However, this did not apply to outward bound enemy vehicles, and Tim
Herlihy established himself in a sniper\'s post at Castleinch and sniped
enemy lorries from across the Lee when they were travelling on the road
to Macroom from Cork. He made himself such a nuisance that one night
after curfew the British carried out a big round-up in this area,
surrounding the district by means of troops on bicycles, dressed in
shorts and wearing canvas shoes. Lightly equipped, they were very mobile
and were all around the area before much notice could be given to those
Volunteers in it. A big comb out then followed by troops on foot. Here
are Tim Herlihy\'s own words for what happened and later, principally to
himself. From a chosen position at Castleinch, I sniped at 450 yards
range across the River Lee enemy lorries going from Cork to Macroom. The
British returned my fire fiercely, accelerating out of range. I never
ascertained definitely the seriousness or number of casualties I
inflicted on them, but we heard reliable reports of wounded military
reaching Macroom. In retaliation the enemy soon raided our area, after
curfew, a change from their usual morning raids. Composed of a bicycle
unit and foot troops, dressed in shorts and wearing canvas shoes.
Mobile, lightly equipped, they quickly and silently infiltrated our
area. They ordered my father, who was outside our house, to get indoors,
firing -18- three shots over his head. It was those shots, breaking the
silence of the early night, that saved myself and a large section of the
Srelane Company meeting in a concealed field about 300 yards away. (The
speed and silence of the enemy had imniobilised our scouts). After
hairbreadth escapes we wormed our way through the British lines;
crossing¬∞ the Lee, we found refuge in Carmoda Wood. From our high
position, Carmoda, Coachford side of Lee, we watched the British
searching the Castleinch area for us all night long. In June, 1921, with
a squad from Srelane Company I captured three British soldiers of the
Essex Regiment after a chase from Ovens. We found them hiding in Kilcrea
Abbey. They surrendered without a fight. They had been detailed from a
special branch organised by the infamous Major Percival, who had
committed many wanton murders in West Cork. Our Brigade H.Q. had the
three Essex Regiment men shot. That week the British made their biggest
round-up raid ever of our area. They arrested young and old.
Fortunately, most of our Volunteers escaped the net. This time I was out
of luck. Escaping from a large column I ran into a small squad. Near
Ballincollig the British lined up all of us, their prisoners. Then, with
R.I.C. helping them, they picked out Jeremiah Herlihy, Tim Healy, Dan
Carroll and myself. We were confined in Ballincollig Military Barracks
until after the Truce, July 11th, 1921. While there we -19- received
much rough treatment and just escaped death on two occasions. Once a
bunch of drunken armed soldiers tried to break into our cells. The
Sergeant of our guard stopped them after a real hard fight, while we
prisoners in the cells, arming ourselves with anything we could find,
stood close to the walls ready to sell our lives dearly. I was in
Ballincollig Barracks when the Truce came on July 11th, 1921. A few days
after we were taken to Victoria Military Barracks, Cork (now Collins
Barracks). Several hundred of our chaps confined here were in fine
spirits and morale. Removed from there to Cork Jail three weeks after,
we were again removed (in the very early hours of the morning) by boat
from Cork Quay to Spike Island. In Spike Island were quite a large
number of our boys, many high-ranking officers; Dick Barrett, Tom
Crofts, Bill Quirke of Tipperary, Henry O\'Mahoney were the selected
leaders. We resisted the British by every means at our disposal, while
the treatment the British meted out to us prisoners was brutal. A
hunger-strike lasting eight days was, I believe, stopped from outside.
Then we broke up and burned our huts. I took part in a fierce fight
against soldiers armed with batons; our boys had pieces of boards.
Casualties on both sides were serious. The soldiers were called off by a
high-ranking British officer in kilts. flushing into the compound, I
heard him shout \"soldiers, stop at once\". \"Don\'t fire\", he ordered
the machine gunners overlooking our position: Eventually the soldiers
drove us out of our partly destroyed huts and into the compound nearby.
Here they lined us by force in some kind of order. Surrounded by guards
with fixed bayonets and machine guns, we were held here until about 5
p.m. Then we were marched out under heavy guard to the \"moat\". This
moat was a space about 15 yards wide between high walls running a circle
about our huts and compound. Here we suffered a wet night (without water
or food since morning) hunched against the walls for shelter. I belonged
to No. 9 hut and being a happy family we managed to keep together in the
\"moat\". Watching the movements of our guards stationed high above us,
we noticed two particular soldiers watching one position as if they had
special orders. Eventually we noticed those two soldiers moving our way.
Soon we saw they were following Dick Barrett, Tom Crofts, Bill Quirke
(Tipperary) and Henry O\'Mahoney. We informed Dick Barrett of the
special watching soldiers. \"Good\", he said, \"we\'ll stay here until
dark, then we will slip off and fool em\". When darkness came we
followed Dick Barrett and Co., slipping away one by one. Unfortunately,
some more of our boys took our evacuated position. These men, weary, sat
down, backs against the wall, legs out. Then about 2 a.m. those two
soldiers opened rapid fire on that position, hitting one man, shooting
off his big toe. Soldiers -21- charged in but at the cry \"man wounded\"
a stretcher came after a long delay and the wounded man was taken away.
Sad to say, he died from the effects. It was while Dick Barrett and Co.
were out in the moat that night they saw the possibility of escaping. It
was from my hut, No. 9, they made their dramatic escape. Jim Cashman
made the ladder of boards from the huts. We prised the stones from the
wall back of our hut, waiting tensely for some hours in case they had to
return before building the hole again. Some time after we were taken to
Maryborough Jail. We were released in Christmas week, 1921. Here ends
Tim Herlihy\'s personal statement. Towards the end of March, 1921, a
Battalion Column was formed. Each of the six Companies supplied a few
men and with some from the Battalion Staff the total came to twenty.
Every man was armed with a rifle. Leo Murphy was O.C. Column. It kept on
the move all the time as a flying column should do and yet it could
never effect much owing to the way the whole Battalion area was held
down by the huge enemy garrison in Ballincollig Barracks which was
situated almost in the centre of the area. In Ballincollig they had an
excellent knowledge of the area for miles around and on account of the
road net and the big amount of transport they could saturate the
countryside with troops in a matter of minutes. Then, too, with the -22-
main road from Cork to Macroom running through Ballincollig there were
constant convoys of troops and police (Auxiliaries, old R.I.C. and Black
and Tans) travelling on it both ways night and day and the Column, under
the circumstances, could only have a nuisance value and indulge in
sniping or attacking the odd enemy patrol that might penetrate to the
more remote parts of the Battalion area. Dick Cotter, who lived on the
boundary between the 1st and 3rd Cork Brigades, had been appointed
Liaison Officer between the two Brigades and was also in charge of
communications. His duties were important ones and are detailed as
follows in his own words : I, Dick Cotter, was appointed Liaison 0ficer
and in charge O.C. of communications by Tim Herlihy, 3rd Battalion, 1st
Cork Brigade, at the request of Dick Barrett, 3rd Cork Brigade. Living
as I was on the boundary of the 1st and 3rd Brigades (Ballinphellic,
Ovens) conveniently near O\'Mahoneys, Belrose, 3rd Brigade Headquarters,
I knew how to contact 3rd Brigade H.Q. quickly. I was the last link of
despatch carriers. So I was continuously on the move, these being my
duties : Despatches to and from 3rd Brigade. Keep 3rd Brigade informed
of enemy movements in our area. -23- Direct and guard 3rd Brigade men
passing through to Cork or Blarney Station (Rly.) Borrow or loan arms.
Transit wounded of 3rd Brigade to Hospital or to safe houses in our
area. Receive and guard 3rd Brigade prisoners. We held the prisoners at
Cullinanes (old house) which was ideally situated in a deep valley near
Aherla. Incidents I can vividly remember: Carrying verbal information
received from F. O\'Donoghue, 1st Cork Brigade, to Comdt. C. Hurley, 3rd
Brigade, that a 3rd Brigade Officer, Jim Hurley, Clonakilty, of whose
places of refuge the British had information, was to be raided for the
following morning and shot at sight. Carrving an urgent despatch to 3rd
Brigade H.Q. O\'Mahonevs. Belrose. Riding a spirited Arab cob, I reached
Kelly\'s Cross, about 40O yards from O\'Mahorieys, about 9 a.m. Around a
bend in the road I was confronted by an enemy outpost 50 yards away, who
immediately opened fire. My pony reacted instantly, whirling around,
almost unseating me, dashed around the bend up the road like the wind.
Bullets did come uncomfortably close but I got clear away. That night I
contacted 3rd Brigade H.Q. at Crookstown and delivered the despatch to
Sean Buckley, Brigade I.0. That British outpost I escaped from formed
part of -24- Major Percival\'s Essex Regiment Column. That morning they
had actually captured Tom Barry at Mahoneys, Belrose, but he, however,
outwitted them and got away. Percival\'s Column burned O\'Mahoneys,
Beirose, and several houses in that area. Two of the wounded 1n upton
ambush, Jack Hartnett and Danny O\'Mahoney, were brought to Bebee
Ford\'s, Ballinphellic. I helped to guard them. On Dick Barrett\'s
instructions I went to town for a doctor. Dr. Dundon refused to travel
out to them with me but Dr. Hegarty came gladly. When I explained the
nature of their wounds he advised an ambulance for hospital. We went to
the Fire Station. Yes, one man would drive but he advised me our only
hope of getting through would be early next morning. I went out with Dr.
Hegarty who did his best for the wounded but said a hospital was
necessary as both men would have a serious operation. Next morning,
about 6 a.m., I directed the ambulance to Bebee Ford\'s for the wounded,
and my sister, who had been helping Bebee Ford nurse them, went back in
the ambulance to the South Infirmary where the 2nd Battalion took over
responsibility for their safety. Dick Barrett asked me to safeguard
Brigade Comdt. Charley Hurley, also wounded at Upton and then staying at
Timothy Sullivan\'s house, Cloughdough. The Sullivans, Tom Kelleher and
I shifted Charley by night in a horse and trap (he was wounded in the
head as well as having a badly sprained ankle) to various safe houses,
eventually to Mahoneys, Windsor, where he remained some days guarded by
-25- \'B\' Company, 3rd Battalion, 1st Cork Brigade. S√©an Buckley and I
brought Charley to my own house, then down to Bebee Ford\'s, where I
parted with them. Charley told me he was recovered enough to be back on
active duty. He was, unfortunately, killed next morning at Humphrey
Ford\'s house, Ballymurphy, about half a mile away from Bebee Ford\'s
house. At the Viaduct ambush I was a forward scout for the 3rd
Battalion. From a position overlooking Waterfall, I saw the British in
larger numbers than I had ever seen before converging on our rear.
Rushing, I gave timely warning to the D.C., Tim Herlihy, who got his
Column away safely except one man, O.C. Signals, Jeremiah Hurley,
Srelane. 1 believe his sense of duty made him hold his signalling
position too long. He was captured and the usual British trick,
pretending to leave him go, as soon as he was a distance firing on him
and leaving him on the field with a bullet through the throat. He died
nine days later in the Mosphere Hospital, Dyke Parade, Cork. The
Battalion gave him a military funeral. A lucky escape for me occurred
after the ambush. There was a man called Chambers, a Protestant farmer
and known to be a grabber. He lived at Ballinora, Waterfall. An uncle of
his name McGivern saw the preparations for the Viaduct ambush being
carried out on his own land. He was under observation by us so he got a
message sent by Chamber\'s sister, his own niece, and she passed through
our ranks without us being aware of her mission to have the military at
Ballincollig informed of what was afoot. This resulted in our withdrawal
from the position as already described. -26- Chamber\'s sister was
married to a neighbour of his named Roberts and that day both Chambers
and Roberts went off to Ballincollig on some supposed business about a
motor byke. It was most likely bringing the information about the ambush
preparations. Chambers had been arrested by the I.R.A. directly after on
suspicion and had been under guard by myself as well as others. He
escaped, however, at a time when I myself was not on duty. When the
encircling military attacked us at the Viaduct, I was confronted by an
advance party of an Officer and two privates and I fired point-blank at
them and got away. Three days later I was conveying despatches from Liam
Deasy to the 1st Brigade, via Miss Horgan of Ballinora. I found myself
in a field digging potatoes for Miss Begley who wanted them for a meal
for the expected 3rd Brigade Column billeted in the area near
Ballymurphy. I was suddenly surrounded by a raiding party of military
but managed to cover over the despatches in the clay. I was taken
prisoner and brought to Ballincollig and in due course was
courtmartialled on a charge of attempted murder, that is, of being
concerned in the Viaduct ambush. While awaiting courtmartial I was
astonished to receive a visit from Chambers dressed in a British
Sergeant\'s uniform. He warned me to say as little as I could at the
courtmartial and he would stand by me. At the courtmartial he said he
had made a mistake and that it was my brother who had been guarding him
before he escaped from the I.R.A., and -27- that I was not implicated.
Another thing that helped to save my life, I believe, was that the
Officer whom I had fired on at the Viaduct was Captain Thompson, the
I.0., and since my capture he had been shot and so was not forthcoming
as a witness. I was duly released. As a matter of interest, when
Chambers escaped from the I.R.A. prison he made his way to Bandon
Barracks and subsequently was travelling in one of the lorries ambushed
by the 3rd Brigade Column at Toureen. He was dressed in civilian clothes
that day and was the only man in the lorry who wasn\'t hit. Perhaps the
ambush party took him to be a prisoner. Dick Cotter\'s personal
statement ends here. Early in 1921 things were getting a bit hot and the
military were all out for big things but owing to information gleaned in
Ballincollig Barracks and dispatched either to Headquarters (Miss
Wallace, Paul Street, Cork) or to Ballinora, those surprise raids were
nullified, although at times not acted on. As 1921 wore on things were
tightening up very much. Of two spies, one lived in Carrigrohane and was
arrested and handed over to the 1st Battalion (Cork City) and duly shot.
The other came into the Military Barracks from the Bantry area; our
section working in the Barracks got him; he got a fair trial but
wouldn\'t divulge anything; he was also -28- executed. Details regarding
these two are given in the \'C\' Company account further on. It was a
tough job collecting the levy in Ballincollig area but it was done. In a
few cases where the levy wouldn\'t be paid cattle were taken and sold,
only two fields away from the Military Barracks. Later on in 1921, about
May, roads were trenched, trees knocked, and this only about one mile
from the Barracks, also bridges spanning the Cork and Macroom line, all
in \'C\' Company area, so that a false sense of security was afloat. At
this time false alarms were circulated in Ballincollig Barracks by the
Military and it was pretty hard to get inside the ring but on that fatal
night of June 27th, 1921, those rumours were circulating again. It was
late that evening when we got on the right track and sent a despatch to
Comdt. Leo Murphy warning him of the raid. He got the despatch in
Waterfall but he was one of a batch of men at a bowling match. As
already described, the military carried out their raid at the pub from
the Cork direction in Waterfall and rounded up the lot. Leo made a
getaway but he was fired on, wounded and captured, and, it was believed,
killed in one of the lorries that brought him to Ballincollig Barracks.
It is believed, too, he tore the despatch in little bits whilst trying
to escape. The Truce came on a couple of weeks later. There was one
fatal shooting accident whilst the Column was in training camp. J. Foley
(\'D\' Company) died from wounds. -29- the Truce were Ovens, Co. Cork.
Aherla, Co. Cork. Farran, Co. Cork. Ballincollig, Co. Cork.
Ballincollig, Co. Cork. Ballingulley, Ballincollig, Co. Cork. Scornaugh,
Ovens, Co. Cork. Castleinch, Ovens, Co. Cork. The following record is
included of \'C\' Company of the 3rd Battalion by Tim O\'Keeffe,
subsequently to become Battalion Quartermaster, and by Jim Ahern, later
Battalion Intelligence Officer. 1916 - 1917. The first Company of
Volunteers was formed in Ballinora by John and Paddy NcAuliffe, the Lane
brothers, Jack Horgan, Dan Mahoney, P. Donovan, Jack Lynch and others.
An organiser from Dublin, named McSweeney, was contacted and a Training
Officer, Hick Hyde, was sent from H.Q. He belonged to the Ballinhassig
Company. The two Companies carried out the usual routine work together,
drilling, route marches, etc. In the Winter of 1917 a cattle drive was
carried out on the lands of persons supplying meat to the enemy at
Ballincollig Barracks. Ballinora and Ballinhassig Companies took part in
the raid and the cattle were driven as far as Bandon. In The Battalion
Officers at M. O\'Began, Comdt. M. Foley, Vice Comdt. D. Keane,
Adjutant. T. O\'Keeffe, Q.M. J. Aherne, I.0. H. O\'Connell, Engineers.
0. Buckley, Transport. J. O\'Suluvan, Signals. It is very hard to piece.
things together after a lapse of thirty years. -30- 1918 the Ballinora
and Ballincollig areas were well organised. As a result of the threat of
conscription by the British, large numbers joined the Volunteers and
Committees were formed to collect any arms they could get. Host of them
were handed up for the asking but in other cases they had to be raided
for. 1918-1919. About August, 1918, a Company election was held to elect
a Captain by F. O\'Donoghue, Brigade Adjutant. Volunteers present were
from Ballinora and Ballincollig: T. O\'Keeffe, F. O\'Sullivan, J.
Murphy, Jerry O\'Shea, J. Ahern, 0. O\'Sullivan and P. Murphy. Jerry
O\'Shea was elected Captain. Leo Murphy became Captain after him. A raid
was carried out for arms at Roberts, Ballinora, by Leo Murphy, D.
Mahoney, J. Lynch, J. Horgan, P. O\'Donovan and others. Two shotguns,
one revolver and some ammunition were taken. About 1919 the 3rd
Battalion was formed and Ballinora and Ballincollig became \'C\'
Company. About December, 1919, the I.R.A. Court was set up and \'C\'
Company elected their own police, who carried out the duties offered to
them. More raids for arms were carried out at Chambers and McGiverns,
Ballinora, and Buttimers, Ballyshoneen, who refused to hand them up, and
were taken by force by Leo Murphy, P. Donovan, J. Lynch, D. Mahoney,
Jerry O\'Shea, T. O\'Keeffe, 3. Murphy and others. -31- Blocking of
roads at the burning of Farran Barracks. \'C\' Company from Ballincollig
and Ballinora were about one mile from Ballincollig Military Barracks
felling trees. In charge were city officers, who brought out hand
grenades. Leo Murphy, J. Lynch, D. Mahoney and Jerry O\'Shea, who were
badly burned and had to rest at Barrett\'s house at Wilton for a few
months, took part in the burning. About the end of the Summer, 1920, a
raid for mails was made at Waterfall, which resulted in the capture of a
letter from Nagle, a local postman, to a man by the name of O\'Sullivan,
an ex-British soldier. They arrested Nagle, who gave all information,
also a photo of O\'Sullivan and details of the place in Cork City where
he was to meet him. Leo and some others went there instead of Nagle and
shot him dead. Later Nagle was also tried and also shot. Nagle had been
in the R.I.C. and actually had a brother still in the Force and
stationed at Tuckey Street Barracks in Cork City. Chambers and Roberts,
Protestant farmers and neighbours, went to Ballincollig about a motor
bike and reported about the Viaduct ambush. Chambers was arrested by the
I.R.A. but escaped and went to Canada with Roberts, who later became a
Sergeant in the British Army. A house at the Viaduct was to be occupied
by R.I.C. but was burned down by \'C\' Company. In December, 1920, Leo
Murphy was elected Battalion Commandant and Jack Murray (Captain), Dan
Mahoney (1st Lieut.) and P. Donovan (2nd Lieut.) succeeded in those
appointments in \'C\' Company. -32- In 1921 Captain Thompson,
Intelligence Officer of the British at Ballincollig, went to Cork City
about 11 a.m. in the morning with two lorries of Black and Tans and
returned about 4 p.m. on a different road, called the old road.
Information was sent to P. Donovan by J. Ahern and T. O\'Keeffe, who
informed Leo Murphy, so he and 0. O\'Mahoney and J. Murray ambushed him
near the Model Farm. One lorry passed and they heard Thompson\'s motor
bike coming and held it up, took him inside the fence and shot him and
took his revolver and bike and made off. Later the military took his
body away to the Barracks. About the same time a spy named Lynch V
living on the Carrigrohane road in a house which was also occupied by
Patrick O\'Sullivan (a brother of Joe, who was executed for the shooting
of Sir Henry Wilson) had to go on the run. This man was an Englishman;
so J. Ahern and T. O\'Keeffe watched his movements and saw him entering
the Orderly Room of the Military Barracks on several occasions and
reported to Leo Murphy, who informed the Brigade. He was arrested
shortly afterwards and shot by \'H\' Company, 1st Battalion, whose area
he was living in. He was buried about 20 yards from the Republican Plot.
Patrick O\'Sullivan went back to England after the Civil War. Another
spy named McCarthy, where from we don\'t know, was with the I.R.A.
prisoners in Ballincollig Barracks. He was there about three weeks when
we heard from a prisoner to look out for him. We reported the matter to
Leo Murphy, who said to arrest him. So one evening he came out of the
Barracks and as there was no one around but J. Ahern he had to follow
him to the city, on account of having no arms, -33- where he met a
Volunteer in Washington Street, Frank O\'Donoghue, 1st Battalion, who
came with him. They captured the spy in Patrick Street near the Lee
Cinema. W walked him to Clarke\'s Bridge where we got a side car and
took him to the old Carrigrohane road. There we. met J. Murphy, T.
O\'Keeffe, D. O\'Sullivan and F. O\'Sullivan. We sent O\'Donoghue back
on the side car and we took the spy in a horse and trap to Killumney and
handed him over to Leo Murphy and others and in a few weeks after he was
shot by Leo Murphy, Dick Murphy (1st Battalion) and others and was
afterwards taken to Ballincollig Barracks and was buried at Carr\'s
Hole, Douglas Road, Cork City. He never spoke a word while a prisoner.
About May, 1921, Leo Murphy, J. Murray, J. Lynch, P. Donovan, Dan
Donovan of \'C\' Company and C. O\'Connell and others got in touch with
F. O\'Sullivan, T. O\'Keeffe and J. Ahern about a quarter of a mile
outside Ballincollig village with the intention of shooting some Tans or
R.I.C. but they never showed up that night, so they raided the train the
following day at Waterfall. When news came to Ballincollig that day Head
Constable Larkin and Sergeant Bloxham proceeded to Waterfall. When about
half a mile from there they were ambushed by Leo Murphy, J. Murray, Dan
Donovan and Jerry O\'Shea. Bloxham was shot dead but the Head Constable
escaped. The Sergeant\'s revolver was taken. A very difficult job was
collecting the arms levy around Ballincollig as the majority were on the
enemy side. One case in particular was the taking of sheep from
Frederick -34- Down, a J.P., living quite close to the Barracks. The
sheep were about 50 yards from the Barrack wall. Those who took part
were C. O\'Connell, T. O\'Connell, J. Delaney, J. O\'Callaghan from
\'B\' Company and J. Murray, Captain, T. O\'Keeffe, C. O\'Shea, J.
Murphy, P. Murphy, D. O\'Sullivan and J. Ahern from \'C\' Company Leo
Murphy was in charge. They were sold at Coachford Fair but were captured
when they arrived at the Cork station so a second raid took place about
two weeks after with great success. The same men were on the job. All
enemy transport arriving and departing to and from Ballincollig
Barracks, their strength, how armed, number of the lorries and the
direction in and out were noted and a weekly report went to Brigade H.Q.
and sometimes daily. We also got equipmont for the Column but no arms.
The biggest raid for mails was at Bishopstown railway siding near the
Waterfall road, about three miles from Ballincollig on the Cork and
Macroom line. Money and mails belonging to the R.I.C. of several
Barracks were captured. Leo Murphy was in charge of the raid, also J.
Horgan, D. O\'Mahoney, J. Lynch. All roads were blocked from
Ballincollig Barracks to the Bandon area in the nature of trenching of
roads, knocking of bridges and felling of trees. As a counterstroke to
the Dripsey executions, the 3rd Battalion Column moved tovards
Ballincollig about half a mile from the Barracks on the South side to
ambush soldiers and Black and Tans but they were all kept inside for a
few days so the Column had to retreat West again. They were in charge of
Leo Murphy, about 20 all told. In June, 1921, Leo Murphy was killed and
Jack Murray, Captain of \'C\' Company, and a lot of others were arrested
so another election was held and resulted as follows : Captain. Daniel
O\'Donovan. 1st Lieut. Patrick O\'Donovan. 2nd Lieut. Richard Lucy.
Adjutant. Francis O\'Sullivan. Q.M. Michael Murphy. This concludes Tim
O\'Keeffe\'s and Jim Ahern\'s record of \'C\' Company of the 3rd
Battalion. They supplied the map showing Battalion and Company areas and
which accompanies this statement. Dan Forde, a Section Leader of \'C\'
Company, and who took part in practically every activity of that Unit,
including most of those under arms, supplied the following brief account
of operations, a number of which are already detailed in that part of
the statement given by T. O\'Keeffe and J. Ahern above. Dan Forde
himself \"as in the Volunteers from 1916 on and was then only 14 years
of age. He was at school up to 1921 and was, before becoming Section
Leader in \'C\' Company, a despatch carrier up to 1919. He used his
schoolbooks tied on the handlebars of his bicycle as a passport whenever
he was held up by British military on his way home from school and often
used to be allowed pass on that account. Only rarely was he ever held
Tap and searched. No despatch -36- carried by him was ever discovered,
for he used conceal them in the handlebar of the bike or in one of his
boots. He was just after doing his Matric. in school in June, 1921, when
he was arrested with a number of other Volunteers at a Company Council
in the publichouse at Waterfall the time that Leo Murphy was shot.
Courtmartialled, he was sentenced to fifteen years irnprisorunent but
was held in the Military Detention Barracks in Victoria Barracks in Cork
for some months and on 22nd December, 1921, was moved to Cork Gaol. He
was released on 21st January, 1922. When the Ballinora Unit was first
organised in April, 1916, Dan Forde, despite his youth, took part in the
parades for drill and in the night patrols held two or three times a
week, which took place on the roads in the Company area. These
activities went on up to April, 1918, and subsequently the Unit was
reorganised and formed into \'C\' Company and became part of the 3rd
Battalion. An armed party, numbering 19, from \'C\' Company took part in
the driving of cattle off the lands of Messrs. Hosford and Magner, both
of whom were supplying meat to Ballincollig Barracks. This may have been
late in 1917 or early in 1918. In January, 1919, the Muskerry Hunt was
stopped in the Company area as a protest against the detention of I.R.A.
prisoners. British Officers were hunting with this pack. Volunteers
holding up the hunt were armed. Raids for arms were carried out at
various loyalists\' -37- houses in June, 1919, two revolvers and
ammunition and two shotguns being obtained. Shotguns were given up
voluntarily by 14 friendly disposed people, including the Revd. Fr.
O\'Donovan of Ballincollig. Some 13 members of the Company raided for a
motor car at Colonel Onslow\'s house at Inchigaggin near Carrigrohane
but had to decamp under fire without the car as the house was guarded. A
week later, however, another try was made and this time the car was
seized. This was in July, 1920. Bridges were knocked at Maglin
(Ballincollig), Curraheen (Cork-Macroom Railway), No. 8 Bridge
(Cork-Bandon Railway), and roads were trenched at Curraheen, Greenfield
Cross, Ballyman Road, Castlewhite Road, Old Abbey Road and Windsor Road,
all in the Company area. These jobs were done during the period March to
May, 1921. Dan Forde took part in the attack on Farran R.I.C. Barracks,
and was engaged with other members of his Company in blocking roads and
on outpost within a 1/4 mile of Ballincollig Barracks. He took part in
the Viaduct ambush, in scouting and intelligence work in connection with
the capture of Captain Thompson, the I.0., in similar duties when
Sergeant Bloxham of the R.I.C. was caught and killed, in the attack on
Ballincollig R.I.C. Barracks in May, 1921, when the police refused to be
drawn, in the Company Arms Levy, the sheep and cattle seizures for
non-payment of the levy, the raids for mails and the destruction of
military stores being carried by rail. -38- While a prisoner during the
Truce he received word that he had passed his Matric., but as he says
himself regarding his capture in June, 1921, at Waterfall, \'That
finished my education\'. This concludes the history of the 3rd Battalion
of the 1st Cork Brigade, all information therein being secured through
the co-operation of the undersigned, some giving a general picture of
the work of the whole Battalion, some giving a more detailed one
regarding a particular Unit or about their own particular duties or the
experiences that fell to their lot during those eventful years from 1916
to 1921.
