I was born in April, 1899. My father was a small farmer. He sent me to
the local national school. I left school at about fifteen years of age
and went to work on my father's farm. In early 1917 a Sinn Féin Club
was formed here in Newtownsandes; it was called the Thomas Clarke Club.
I was one of the first members. There were only ten or eleven members at
first. from the members of the Sinn Féin Club the Volunteers were formed
here about the summer of 1917. It was a man named Tom O\'Grady who was
principally responsible for the formation of the Volunteers. He became
the first Captain and I became 1st Lieutenant. The strength of the
Company at this time was 17 or 18 men. We drilled and paraded all that
year. We had no arms that year. In the spring of 1918 the Company was
reorganised. The reason for the reorganisation was the threat of
conscription at the time. The strength of the Company increased from
about 18 men to about 150. Conscription was the cause of bringing in men
who would never have joined. They got protection by being in the
Company. All. of the men who joined up remained faithful to the Company
and none of them left after the conscription scare was over. A man named
William O\'Sullivan of Derry, Listowel, was, I think, made Company
Captain when the Company was reorganised and I was 1st Lieutenant. There
was a general election at 2. the end of the year but the Sinn Féin
candidate was returned unopposed and the Company took no part in the
election. In 1919 there was very little doing until coming on to winter
when I, with the other men of the Company, took part in collecting shot
guns from the farmers around. In 1920 I, with others, continued the
collection of the shot guns in the area. The people around were now
wholeheartedly behind the Volunteers and the Sinn Féin movement. In
November of this year a man named Eddie Carmody who used to live here in
Newtownsandes and was originally a member of this Company, was shot dead
by Tans in Ballylongford. He was living in Ballylongford for some time
before he was shot. The shooting of Carmody put new life into the
Company here and the men of the Company were very anxious to avenge his
death. About a month or so after the shooting of Carmody two R.I.C. men
were captured in Ballylongford by men of that Company. They were sent
over to our Company and were imprisoned here in Newtownsandes. I with
other men of the Company helped to guard them for about seven days when
they were released on a plea from the Paish Priest of Ballylongford at
the time. At the end of the year the police were very active searching
and raiding Volunteers homes. With all this and the shooting of Carmody,
the Company were anxious to do something to hit back, At this time an
R.I.C. man named O\'Sullivan was transferred to Listowel from
Kilmallock. He was a Sergeant in Kilmallock and had been promoted to the
rank of District Inspector. He had taken charge of the 3. R.I.C.
barracks in Kilmallock earlier in the year when the barracks was
attacked by the I.R.A. In the attack on Kilmallock a Kerryman - a member
of the I.R.A. and a Gaelic League organiser - was shot dead. This man to
prove his sincerity disregarded normal protective measures for his
safety and came out into the open during the attack on the barracks. His
name was Liam Scully and he felt he was not being wholeheartedly trusted
by his comrades, and it appears that this was the reason for his action
when he was shot. In January 1921 an order came from Humphrey Murphy,
Brigade 0/C Kerry No. I Brigade, to the Battalion Staff of which Jim
Sugrue was 0/C, that District Inspector O\'Sullivan was to be executed.
It seems the Battalion Staff discussed the order for some time and tried
unsuccessfully to form a plan to carry out the order. They then called
for Volunteers from the Companies in the Battalion area. The Volunteers
for the job were slow in coming forward and it was a month at least
before the order was carried out. Jack Sheehan, Con Brosnan, Daniel
O\'Grady and myself from the Newtownsandes Company volunteered for the
job. Sheehan lived at Coillwee, Listowel, and belonged to the part of
the Company there which was included in the Newtownsandes Company. We
then received our instructions from William O\'Sullivan, the Company
0/C. Having accepted the job myself and the other three men discussed
the possibility of carrying it out with the Battalion Staff, Con
Brosnan, O\'Grady and myself obtained a revolver each and seven or eight
rounds of ammunition each. We suspected that the ammunition was not up
to standard. We got the revolvers and ammunition two nights before the
job and on the night 4. before we had a practice shot each and we were
satisfied that he ammunition was more or less O.K. I came up to Con
Brosnan\'s house and stayed with him the night before. Daniel O\'Grady
stayed at home and Jack Sheehan stayed at his own home in Coillwee,
Listowel. At l0o\'clock on the morning, I left Con Brosnan\'s and met
Dan O\'Grady as arranged the night before and the two of us walked to
Listowel. Con Brosnan cycled into the town. We all met in Miss Stack\'s
public-house in Listowel. Miss Stack\'s was always a friendly place for
the boys and was sometimes frequented by them. She supplied us with a
couple of drinks while we were waiting. It was about 12 noon when we met
in the pub. I was in charge and we all felt somewhat nervous. I said to
Con Brosnan and Dan O\'Grady: \"We have a duty to perform and must do
it\". Our scout, Jack Sheehan, who was not armed, had not come into the
pub. He was on duty outside between the police barracks and a point
opposite Stack\'s pub on the other side of the street. The distance
between the barracks and this point was about 100 yards. District
Inspector O\'Sullivan lived in a private house alongside Stack\'s pub.
He usually left the barracks and crossed the street almost it front of
the barracks to get to his home. The signal arranged was that Sheehan
would walk parallel with the D.I., that is that as the D.I. came towards
the pub on the pub side Sheehan would keep in line with him on the far
side. It so happened that when the D.I. came out of the barracks and
crossed over to our side of the street he stopped to speak for a few
minutes to someone on the path. The result was that Sheehan appeared
opposite the pub without the D.I. being outside the pub. The scout then
retraced his steps but returned in about three minutes, the D.I. being
in line 5. With him and just outside the pub door. This was the signal
we were waiting for. The three of us were sitting side by side inside
the front window. Brosnan and O\'Grady took the lead going out into the
street. I followed on their heels. Brosnan and O\'Grady opened fire
together and fired about four shots each while I fired six in all,
making sure that the execution was complete. It had been arranged that
the four of us would escape through the sports\' field. After going
through the sports\' field we were called on to halt by a man named
Sweetman - this man\'s house was always used as a meeting place for the
loyalists of the time. Sweetman said to us: \"Stand your ground, take
your punishment\". Our reply was: \"You should get the same as
O\'Suilivan\". I would have shot him there and then only our ammunition
was limited. This man actually deserved to be shot for his part in
helping the R.I.C. It was in his house that the Tans, R.I.C. and
military were entertained while in Listowel. I and the other three went
on about our business. I arrived home that evening and attended a
section meeting of the Company that same evening. The men of the Company
were not aware of part in the shooting. Just after the shooting of
O\'Sullivan the Column for Kerry No. 1 Brigade was formed. Myself, D.
O\'Grady and Con Brosnan of the Newtownsandes Company were selected for
it. Tom Kennelly of Mooneen became the 0/C of the Column and Denis
Quille of Listowel became Vice 0/C. Shortly after, in February, myself,
Con Brosnan, Ned Joe Walsh, Con Dee, Deniel O'Grady and Denis Quille
ambushed two R.I.C. men in Ballylongford. They were wounded and we
disarmed them and got two revolvers. I bad a rifle that night. The other
6. men had either a rifle or a shot gun. The Column after being formed
managed to get a number of rifles from Tarbert. The Redmondite
Volunteers there had got them after the Howth gun-running and willingly
handed them over to the Column. During the attack by the I.R.A. in
March, 1921, on the Ballybunion R.I.C. barracks I with the other men of
the Newtownsandes Company helped to block the roads and fell trees to
prevent the passage of help to Ballybunion R.I.C. The Black and Tans had
arrived in Tarbert by this time so I, Con Brosnan and D. O\'Grady,
though attached to the Column, took with us from the Newtownsandes
Company about six or eight men to Tarbert for an attack on an R.I.C.
patrol there in the month of April. The Tarbert Company had supplied us
with details of their (R.I.C. and Tans) movements. I was in charge and
arrived with the men in the town at about 7 o\'clock in the evening. I
was armed with a rifle and revolver the other men had either rifles,
revolvers or shot guns. We took up positions about 400 yards from the
barracks near Miss McCarthy\'s and waited for the Tans to come out.
About half an hour after taking up positions the Tans came out. I gave
the order to open fire. They replied immediately, but we broke off the
action and returned to Newtownsandes. The action had lasted 20 minutes.
About a month later we decided to go back to Tarbert to make another
attack. The men in the second attack were the same as took part in the
first one, with a couple of exceptions. I was in charge again. We just
fired a few shots each at the patrol again and also fired a few shots at
the barracks. The Tans and R.I.C. returned the fire. We left almost at
once but the Tans kept firing for some time after. 7. The last night
before the truce I and the most of the other men from Newtownsandes who
had taken part in previous attacks in Tarbert went into Tarbert armed
with rifles and revolvers. Our object was to get a Tan named Farnloe who
had shot one of our men - Jack Sheehan, our scout in the shooting of
D.I. O\'Sullivan. Sheehan was shot dead in a bog near his home. He was a
member of the Column and came home one day to attend to some business
matter. He was sitting on a low wall near his home when he saw a lorry
load of Tans aproaching. He immediately got behind the wall and took
cover in some lohg grass. As the Tans approached he was under the
impression that he could be seen from the road so he started to run. The
Tans opened fire and he fell dead. We arrived in Tarbert about 10.30
p.m. I left about 8 men outside the town but brought Con Brosnan and D.
O\'Grady into the town with me. Then we got into the town a scout there
informed us that Farnloe, the Tan, was in Mulcaby's pub with three or
four other Tans. I sent Con Brosnan and D. O'Grady back to collect the
men we had left about 1/2mile outside the town. I was now on my own. In
the meantime the Tans started to leave the pub. I was in the open street
near the pub on the opposite corner and had to think quickly what to do.
There were four of them so I opened fire with the revolver on the four
Tans. They did not return the fire but ran for the barracks and opened
fire from there, but by this time I was on my way to join my friends.
This action took place one hour before midnight on the eve of the truce.
8. During the truce I went to a training camp at Ballyheigue, The
instructor was named Kissane, Known locally as Captain Hand. I joined
the National Army in 1922 and remained in it until 1929. I had a serious
illness during this time.
